Hi everyone, welcome to this week's episode of No Such Things A Fish live from the Cheltenham Literature Festival with a very special guest.
It was our good friend Rachel Paris.
Yes, Rachel's been on the pot a few times before and she with that Cheltenham partly because she has a brilliant new book out.
It is a pride and prejudice sequel of sorts. It's all about Charlotte Lucas.
You might remember Marie's Mr Collins, Big Mistake and Rachel's book is called "Introducing Mrs Collins" and it's all about what happens next.
And it reintroduces basically the whole cast of Pride and Pride but with a focus on Charlotte, Lucas, it's a really great book.
I've just finished reading it. So much fun. It's got a lot of really funny lines in it and it's exciting too.
Any fans of Austin or Pride and Pride I think will really like it.
I hope you really liked this episode of No Such Things A Fish as well but if you would like a Loma episode, this one has been really beautifully honed down by your lovely editor James Harkin.
But if you would like the full, almost an edited version, that is possible by joining Club Fish.
Yes, Club Fish is our members club. It contains all kinds of stuff. It contains longer episodes. It contains add free episodes.
It contains bonus material of all varieties. If you want to find out any more, just go to our Patreon which is patreon.com/No Such Things A Fish.
It's so much fun stuff to check it out now.
Yeah, it's really good. If you can join it, it really helps us to make the podcast which is what we intend to do for the rest of our lives.
But one important thing to say is that this podcast that you're listening to right now on the main feed is always going to be free.
The other stuff is just for bonus. It's just for extra. It's just if you really want more. Anyway, sit back, relax and listen to this episode of No Such Things A Fish with Rachel Paris. On with the show.
On with the podcast.
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Things A Fish, a weekly podcast this week coming to you live from the Cheltenham Literature Festival.
My name is Dan Schreiber. I am sitting here with James Harkin, Andrew Hunter Murray and Rachel Paris.
And once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our four favourite facts from the last seven days and in no particular order, here we go.
Starting with fact number one and that is Rachel.
Oh, right. My fact is, in 1764, the Earl of Sandwich read a long erotic poem out in the House of Lords as revenge for a fellow MP setting a baboon on him.
Quite a lot. That is an amazing fact. There's a lot of different components to that fact.
Lots to process. The Earl of Sandwich who invented the sandwiches of the same guy.
I don't know. He's the fourth Earl of Sandwich John Montague. Is it the right one?
It was. I read into it.
So we name the sandwich after him, but it feels like we should name all this other stuff after him, really, doesn't it? It's more notable.
I think if an erotic poem was called a sandwich, it wouldn't be as sexy.
I think so. I just think the word sandwich is inherently cut to Dianne. You know, I just think it's...
No, I disagree. Yes. It sounds like a three-person activity, doesn't it?
It gets fired off the strictly tour. Let's just say that.
John Wilkes, who was an MP and went on to be famous for so much more important things than baboon prankery, and Thomas Potter wrote an essay on woman, which was a parody of Alexander Pope's essay on man.
Basically, they were all members of a thing called the Hellfire Club, of which there were lots of different iterations.
The Hellfire Clubs were very irreverent. They were blasphemous. That was the whole thing blasphemy and pranks.
One of the pranks that John Wilkes did was he got a baboon. Other accounts say it was a mandrill. Don't sue me.
And dressed it up and painted it up to look like the devil and released it at one of the meetings of the Hellfire Club.
It basically came for the Earl of Sandwich. The Earl of Sandwich kind of had a moment.
You would be scared if a baboon came at you. How dangerous is a baboon?
The thing is that he wasn't massively worried about it being a baboon. He genuinely thought it was the devil.
And obviously with his name Sandwich, meaning something so sexy, he obviously thought that the devil had come for him.
And he said when the baboon came right to his face, he said, "No, I'm just, I'm not as bad a sinner as all the other people here."
Oh really?
Yeah, he dumped his friends in it and said, "Look, he's much worse than me. Go and get him, devil."
But it was a baboon, so it didn't have the capacity to. Or a mandrill.
Or a mandrill. But don't just say, but baboons can do a lot of damage.
I wasn't questioning it. I always sort of, it was a rhetorical question.
It's like, obviously, if you let a baboon loose in my house, I'm not going to just say, "Alright kids, have fun."
It's like, how come no one got savaged is my question?
I don't know what happened apart from the, yes, I'm saying I am but half a sinner and saying everyone else here is more, is worse than that.
But essentially, after that in the 1760s, Wilks, John Wilks and the Earl of Samuach, who had been great friends, then had fallen out after this event.
And so to get him back, John Wilks and Potter had written this, yeah, this erotic, sort of erotic satirical poem.
And Samuach, the Earl of Samuach tried to dobb him in, basically, in the House of Lords and he read it out in full, accusing him of seditious libel, and it worked.
And it's really rude, as well, has f-bombs in it, which you wouldn't think for the 1700s, but it does.
And what's weird is the subject of this piece was a courtesan in London called Fanny Murray.
Any relation?
Yes.
So, Granny Fanny Murray, right?
Granny Fanny, as we call it, yes.
She's the subject of this piece.
It's lucky that she rhymes so well that she's in this poem, isn't it?
But the Earl of Samuach, who was reading it out, actually had had an affair with Fanny Murray, so it was really odd because he was sort of reading about this woman who he secretly had had an affair with.
Wow. Rich seems. Rich seems. It's one of the dirty phrases that was in the poem, essentially.
Well, when the Earl was reading it out, there was one Lord who shouted for him to stop in the Chamber of the House of Lords.
So this is appalling, this is outrageous. The other Lord, they're all shouting, "Go on, go on. They wanted to hear a bit more of it."
Wilkes fled to France, I believe, but it also, this incident, collapsed Samuach's reputation, too.
He had a really bad reputation for a long time after this.
He's an amazingly interesting guy. I don't know if you guys researched Samuach himself.
He was first Lord of the Admiralty on three separate occasions.
And his main job was improving the Navy, but the main means he had to do that was to show interesting models of ships to the King to try and interest him to LA.
So he just had to take him, like, he had to commission models of ships.
It feels like a job you were made for, I think.
I would absolutely love to do that. Your Majesty, I have some new Hornby stuff if we'd like to talk about the Railways.
He had to commission a model of the historic dockyards. They weren't historic at the time. They could just call the dockyards.
But yeah, he was once described the island of Samuach as looking like he was walking down both sides of the street at once.
What does that mean?
What does it mean?
I don't know what it means.
Yeah, I mean, for the 1700s, it's stunning.
Does it mean he was carpulant?
I just think it meant he walked funny.
Oh, sort of mean he was a bit, or he was indecisive. It's okay.
I can't pass it.
Because I think he was. And actually Sandwich and Wilkes, if you look at those two as a pair, they really liked insults in each other.
And they did it in Parliament quite a lot.
So there's a really famous time when that happened, which was when Sandwich said to Wilkes,
"I don't know whether you'll die upon the gallows or I'll buy the pox."
And Wilkes said, "That depends my Lord, whether I embrace your principles or your mistresses."
So that's like a famous one.
Very good.
It's an absolute singer.
The others, you are a fat, greasy, unprincipled villain.
Not quite as much as it is.
Not sophisticated.
But Wilkes, one of the slurs they used to throw him was they used to say he was the ugliest man in England.
And he kind of ate mile M&M style leaned into that and quite, he owned it.
He used to say, "Yeah, but after half an hour with my face, that goes away and the charm comes through."
And he also used to say that if there was a rival who was a good-looking man and they were both going for the same girl,
if he was given a month-long advantage, he could win her over if the other guy was then introduced.
But he needed a month.
And...
I read that he was advised never to risk showing his face to a pregnant woman.
Wow.
Interesting.
But she'd get pregnant twice.
Oh!
Baby!
I want to tell you more about the Hellfire Club.
Oh, yeah.
Of which there were several iterations.
And I think it's a cool name.
So different clubs were like, "We're the Hellfire Club as well."
But the OG Hellfire Club was founded in 1718 by the Duke of Warton.
And then it was sort of carried on by Sir Francis Dashwood in the 1730s,
which is when the baboon incident and all of this was happening.
It wasn't really called the Hellfire Club at that point until later it was known
as the Order of the Friars of St Francis of Wickham.
That is a really random half.
Yes.
I think it's quite Monty Python.
Right, right, right.
To call it that.
So they called it Francis after Francis Dashwood.
And they met in high Wickham in these sort of man-made caves,
which is where what I will keep referring to as the baboon incident happened.
Right.
But it was very reverent.
They would like come to meetings dressed as members of the Bible for a laugh.
They hold like lured ceremonies.
They had orgies.
They got to mischiefs general.
And I like that the original Warton Hellfire Club was not a gentleman's club.
It accepted men and women equally.
Okay.
Quite progressive.
And its motto was, "Do what thou wilt?"
Holy.
Very nice to Crowley.
Well, I think Granny Fanny used to go there as well, dressed as a nun,
because they used to get women to dress up as nuns.
I mean, she again, like what a spectacular figure.
She was so famous in her day.
She was written about by Casanova.
She was part of the Hellfire Club.
She was read out as part of a poem in Parliament.
Like Emma, he's Nelson's mistress.
Hamilton.
Yeah, exactly.
She was part of the famous Harris's list,
the sort of yellow pages of women of the night that was compiled in Covent Garden.
Why are they yellow?
They're yellow.
So this was a book that you could literally buy,
and it would tell you the address and the name of the women who were living in Central London,
who were sex workers, and they would all have a check for venereal disease
ahead of being able to be put into the book, and they had to pay for their listing.
It's almost like the Edinburgh Fringe Guide.
You get a little blurb.
You pay your money to get that in there.
There didn't know photos at the time, but yeah.
And just on Wilkes, who was the other character you mentioned about Samwich.
So Wilkes became, you said that he went to France.
He had to flee to France.
Well, the reason was he had a paper like a journal called The North Britain.
And in issue number 45, he argued that they should change Parliament
and change the way that democracy worked.
And everyone agreed, apart from the people in charge.
And it became this massive thing.
The number 45 became absolutely massive.
If you said 45, it meant that you were in a dissident and you were against the government.
And they tried to stop people from saying it.
People would write 45 on the walls.
Really?
They would meet in groups of 45 and eat 45 dishes.
Oh.
When Wilkes was arrested, he was then released.
And the club drank 45 drinks to him between 7.45pm and 12.45am.
Wow.
Yeah.
That's amazing.
One extra tiny little nugget about John Wilkes is that there's a few pubs in London
that carry his name.
There's one called The Three John's of which he is one of the three.
There's a statue you can see of him.
But also, he was the middle name of a presidential assassin.
John Wilkes Booth.
Oh, so he was.
The Wilkes was a tribute to him.
And many sources actually say that he's a distant relative.
Because I know Shari Booth, Tony Blair's wife,
is a distant relative of the John Wilkes Booth family as well.
Well, he supported the rebels in the American War of Independence.
That's right.
Yeah.
Who did?
Wilkes.
Oh, really?
So maybe that's the factor.
I have a link to this.
Guess what?
The Boston Tea Party, which, you know, many ways kicked off the American Revolution,
contained sandwiches because the Earl of Sandwich was present.
What?
How good is that?
The Earl of Sandwich.
What do you mean it?
It wasn't an actual tea party.
No, well, he was not an actual sandwich.
He was not such an idiot.
We need to walk around with this.
I got one of the M&S platters.
I hope you don't mind.
Some of it.
Got a shitload of Battenberg here.
M&S platters.
You're played to the Cheltenham crowd, aren't you?
Can I get it?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, no, this is an audience fact.
He got emailed in by Jessica Ringoison.
So thank you so much, Jessica.
The Earl of Sandwich.
When he was First Lord of the Emeralds,
he was in Boston when the Tea Party broke out.
I just think that's lovely.
He watched it from a window overlooking the waft.
How lovely.
Yeah.
Okay.
We need it.
Can I just say two tiny things?
Just because what led me to talk about that erotic poem was
I was looking at the rise of romanticcy.
And the Victorians were absolutely obsessed with
flagellation.
And I just wanted to tell you quickly that Algin and Swinburne wrote
a 94 stanza poem in the Victorian era called Reginald's Flogging.
And also that John Camdenhotton wrote a comic opera
called Lady Bumtickle's Rebels.
Oh.
And we don't mean the chocolate snack.
The delicious chocolate snack, don't we?
Who knows?
We do need to move on to our next facts, so let's do it.
Okay, it is time for fact number two.
And that is Andy.
My fact is that Japan's greatest ever prison escape artist
escaped four times twice by using his own miso soup.
What?
So this is the story of Yoshishiro Tori.
Oh, that's nice.
He was a prisoner and there was a prison in Japan
which has made itself a museum.
Well, it was closed down as a prisoner then it became a museum.
It didn't just like vote among the inmates.
You're doing 20 to 25, but we could just be curators, couldn't we?
It's nice, it's a nicer life.
So he was a Japanese man born in 1907.
As a young man, he got into trouble.
He fell in with a gang and during a robbery of a shop,
one of the gang stabbed a shopkeeper who very sadly died.
Yoshishiro Tori always maintained he'd never actually committed that murder.
He was just part of the gang, but he was jailed.
And yet he launched this incredible career,
escaping from four different prisons.
Progressively harder prisons as well.
It's really interesting, but what's miso soup got to do with that?
Well, I'm glad you asked me, James.
So he escaped the first couple of times just through slightly different methods.
I mean, they were both very impressive as well.
And we should say the details of this, they're a little bit hazy.
He has definitely become a folk hero in Japan.
There's a statue of him in the prison that he was kept in.
But prison number three, they thought, right, you've escaped from two hard prisons.
This is a nightmare.
And he was put in special extra heavy handcuffs that were impossible to get out of.
And every day, he would drip a little bit of his miso soup onto the cuffs.
And slowly, it would erode the handcuffs over time.
And eventually, after a couple of years of doing this, he managed to...
Okay, it's a bit gross.
He dislocated his own shoulder, but that was necessary so he could get out of the incredibly narrow slot
that the soup was delivered through.
What? I know. Wow. As I say, folk heroes, some of the details are hazy.
And he was gone.
And then, so they thought, right, this is a nightmare.
We're going to put you in a cell where there is one window, which is the size of your head.
Try getting out of that.
Because previously, he'd done a lot of great work getting through windows.
Make it smaller than his head.
It's a good point.
Well, he thought, "I'm going to reverse you personally this."
He went upside down, and he had a miso soup bowl.
And he used that to dig his way out of the prison.
And eventually, he was given a shorter sentence.
The thing I like about the digging is that...
So, Shawshank Redemption style, you've got to get rid of all of the rubble.
And apparently, to this day, they have no idea where he put any of it.
Eight it.
Did he... Oh, and there we go. Just a guess.
Yeah, a guess. Good guess.
I don't think it's the right guess.
That's a good one. It still happens.
Incredible daring escapes from Jail still happen.
There was one that happened in France nearly on very recently,
where one prisoner left, and then they discovered that actually two had left.
And it's because a second prisoner had snuck himself into the laundry bag
that the guy was carrying over his shoulder.
No.
That's so basic.
Yeah, just walked out with him.
This guy just in this Hessian kind of laundry bag hanging over his shoulder.
I think it was as simple as that.
I've got this slippery guy, Choi Gapbok, who had practiced yoga for 23 years.
He was arrested on suspicion of robbery.
This was relatively recent times.
It was put in a detention cell.
Stayed there for five days, and he applied skin ointment.
I don't know where he got skin ointment from.
It must have been very low security prison slash spa.
He put it on the upper part of his body and slipped out
by squeezing through a tiny food slot, like you describe.
Oh, boy.
The entire escape took 34 seconds, apparently.
Wow.
And the space, in case you were wondering, he was five foot four.
The space was just under six inches tall and 18 inches wide.
Right.
What kind of food are they delivering?
It requires such a tall--
Maybe like a wedding cake?
I know.
Is it what?
Can the Tony?
We will not collapse their souffleys for them.
Well, you have to get a whole one.
No, sir, why don't you put the sausage in sideways?
I looked into other corrosive soups.
Oh, alterific.
So apparently, I couldn't--
I don't have the scientific know-how to have understood
all the articles I read.
But there seems to be an understanding
that canned chicken noodle soup is corrosive to metals.
Even though it's in a metal--
Yeah, because it starts to corrode the metal that it is inside.
And therefore, it can, after some years, be quite bad for you.
But I wonder if he'd use chicken noodle soup it might have worked as well.
Well, there is a prisoner who was called Juan Lopez.
And I don't think this is true, because the story is that he escaped
a Mexican prison using his own salsa.
Again, too.
And that's to corrode the bars of his cell.
And actually, Mythbusters, the TV show, experimented with this.
And they found that only if you could consistently add electricity.
If you could use electrolysis, you could corrode the bars using the salsa.
But he probably didn't have access to that on the inside.
Right.
So that seems to not be true, I think.
Wow.
OK, here's a quiz for you.
Stephen J. Russell, American con artist, sense prison.
He escaped using a green felt tip.
What did he do?
Oh.
He colored his food and said, this is so badly off
that I'm going to need to pass it back through the food slot.
And they disguised himself as a sausage.
Yes.
Did he use the felt tip and to make some part of his body look really ill?
Oh, that's good.
Yes.
That's good, but not quite right.
Not quite right.
He had a white jumpsuit and he colored it in green
and disguised himself as a doctor and walked out.
No.
Wow.
How much of that ink was in that pen?
I get like two minutes out of a highlighter.
That's pretty impressive.
Check this guy out.
This is a phenomenal one.
There was a prison in America, which was known to be escape proof.
21st of July, 1971, a guy called Warren George Briggs escapes from it.
And four other people help him to get out.
Bullets are fired at them and he manages to escape.
He eventually turns himself in and he says the only reason that he escaped it
is because he wanted to get some press, some PR for the fact that while inside jail
he had invented and developed a water desalting process
that would enable mankind to purify sea water at a reasonable price.
And he was like, no one's listening to me.
So I'm going to escape this inescapable jail and all the headlines are going to say,
man escapes, but invent water source.
And did it work?
Did his thing work?
There's been no further story about Warren George Briggs.
Superb.
One of the archetypes of one of the places that is most famous for escapes
is Colditz, the German castle during the Second World War,
which was where lots of people were put and was supposedly escape proof
and it's where lots of people who had escaped other places were sent.
Sorry to interrupt.
Like all these prisons, like stop calling them escape proof.
You can't escape, it's like calling boats unsinkable.
Like really, you're tempting fate.
You're so right.
And Colditz was a terrible place to try and keep prisoners
at 700 rooms.
It was this huge, like it was really quite hard to defend, I would say.
And it had to have its own escape committee,
because so many of the men in there were plotting their own escapes.
And they had to basically say, you can't escape on Tuesday.
Terry's escaping on Tuesday.
You can go Thursday 9/15 to 9/30.
But don't go over 9/30, because Barry's getting out.
And it just, some officers, this is really interesting.
Let's see if you can work out why.
Pretended to escape.
They only pretended to escape Colditz.
To see what would happen, what the punishment would be if they got caught.
Not quite.
Oh, wait, nice guess.
So they pretended as if they hid in the jail.
So then they thought he's escaped.
And then they stopped looking for him within the jail.
And then he could get a highlighter and draw all over.
You're close.
They escaped and they hid within the jail.
Yeah, within Colditz.
Rachel, do you want to have a guess?
No.
All right.
So the reasoning was, they were escaped and then hide.
More TV quizzes should just have that as an answer.
Basically, they escaped and then they hid.
So that when a different officer actually did escape,
the hiders would pretend to be the actual escapee
so that they could delay their discovery.
So no one was looking for the guy who had actually escaped
because they thought he was still there.
Right.
OK.
It feels like still only one person's escaped.
Well, look, we won the war in the end.
That's the main thing.
[LAUGHTER]
Can I tell you what toilets are used for in American prisons?
Apart from the obvious.
Is it going to be a contraband thing?
It's not.
So this is quite a few different facilities in America,
especially Union County jail in New Jersey,
which is where I read about it.
And some prisoners are flirting with each other using their toilets.
And what they do is they take all of the water out
and they say, "This one's not for normal use."
And then it's attached to all of the pipes
and so you can yell into it.
And then people in another cell can hear what you're saying.
Romeo.
[LAUGHTER]
And apparently you have one cell where everyone knows
that's the place people go for the flirting.
Like if there's, let's say, that the men's wing is on one part
and the women's wing is somewhere else, but they're attached.
Oh, OK.
So one man would go in here, one woman would go in there,
and they had like a special knock.
So you know that it's your particular girlfriend or boyfriend.
Oh, wow.
And yeah, this is the thing that's happening in America right now.
And it's not just they have phone sex through the toilets.
Sorry, James, how do you do phone sex through a toilet?
Do you know all the stuff that I said a bit ago
about how they're using it like a phone?
Oh, OK.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, I thought you were then introducing a phone
as like an extra thing.
Got it.
So how will you pick phone sexes?
You actually introduce the phone sometimes.
Actually, prism phones do have to be introduced to get them
onto the premises.
So that's--
I would've done on this, but you mean just spoken sex.
Well, shout it.
Shout it into it.
Shout it out.
No, no, no, no, no.
I do Rachel drink sex with my wife.
Go, honey, have you seen the new iPhone?
She's got this new feature.
OK, so they talk, yeah.
Talk sex.
They talk sex, he works with each other.
And they also carry out religious conversions.
They pass news.
News.
What?
You don't want to mistake it, the phone exchange,
when that's happening to you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, it is time for fact number three.
And that is James.
OK, my fact this week is that one of Britain's greatest
living playwrights, Tom Stoppard, wrote the final draft
of the movie, "Bate Hulvin."
There you go.
So, yeah, this is Tom Stoppard, great playwright.
And he does a lot of work on the side for movies.
It turns out, which I didn't know.
He has polished scripts for 102 Dalmatians,
Indiana Jones and the last Crusade.
And one very exciting thing that I found about
when looking through an inventory of his papers in America
is that I don't know if he wrote the final script,
but he definitely did some work on Stoppard,
my mum will shoot.
Oh, no.
Friend of the podcast.
Our white whale of a film.
Oh, absolutely.
Yeah.
But he basically says that he finds the work frustrating,
but in a certain time wasting.
But at the end of the day, you have to wear money somehow.
And these, when you're doing it for a very big movie,
so he worked on Indiana Jones, for instance,
he earns an awful lot of money for it.
So much that you can't really turn it down.
Yeah, and it's not even just polishing scripts.
Like, for example, he was in the shower one day,
and his phone was ringing and he jumped out,
and it was Steven Spielberg, and Spielberg was like,
"I'm filming Schindler's List right now,
and this scene doesn't work.
What would you do in this situation?"
And he would go, you know,
so he's like standing naked in his shower room,
solving problems while they're on set.
And that was part of the gig as well,
that they would just go to him as a brain.
Is he the only person to have worked on both Schindler's List
and Stoppard, my mum will shoot?
It can't be a long list.
That's not going to be a huge list, no.
But we should say, so, Beethoven is a classic of the '90s.
I'm sure some of you've seen it.
The dog is a real comic character,
full of pratfalls, making life hell for the dad of the family.
He's like, what would you call that?
St. Bernard dog.
Yeah, it's a St. Bernard dog, and he's always like,
if he runs, he ruins the whole house.
The dog that was used was a descendant of Buster Keaton's own dog.
So Buster Keaton had a dog,
and his wife Eleanor started breeding them,
and these St. Bernard dogs then became the stars,
and stunt doubles of Beethoven the movie.
They have them one best picture, of course.
What? What?
At the American Humane Society Awards,
for outstanding words which raised public awareness of animal issues.
Other winners include Babe, Black Beauty,
Free Willy and Chicken Run.
Do you know what? Those are all good films.
They are, in 2011, this best picture to raise awareness
of animal issues was won by how to train your dragon.
[laughter]
A thin year.
And 2012, it was won by Rise of the Planet of the Apes.
Oh, which I think is a documentary about the Earl of Sandwich, isn't it?
But actually, Beethoven's second,
so there have been five, actually, I think eight Beethoven movies.
But there's Beethoven, Beethoven's second,
Beethoven's third, Beethoven's fourth,
Beethoven's fifth.
And you kind of got the feeling that they had to do that
to get the Beethoven's fifth joke.
That's why they did all those.
But Beethoven's second was nominated for an Academy Award.
It was.
In the category.
[laughter]
Best dog. No, it was a best song, best original song,
or a dolly cut and song that's in that.
Wow, that's very exciting.
Tom Back to Tom Stopbard for a second.
He wrote a play, which was called The Real Thing,
and in 2014, there was a revival of The Real Thing,
put on stage, which he was part of,
and you and McGregor was the lead role in it.
And during an interview, someone said,
"Wow, what's it like working with you and McGregor again?"
And he said, "I don't know, I've never worked with you and McGregor before."
And he said, "No, you have."
You did a rewrite of Star Wars Episode 3, Revenge of the Sith.
And you would have ridden some Jedi dialogue for you and McGregor.
I did look up some of the lines from that film
just to see if any of them have the stop-hard magic.
What about the droid attack on the wookies?
It feels like him.
I have seen a security hologram of him killing younglings.
Clearly stop-hard.
What stop-hardian is in the OED,
but I never read any Tom Stop-hard.
So what is his genre? It's kind of witty.
I don't, yeah, they're brilliantly sort of funny and clever.
And for a long time, people accused him of being,
as a ten-man of British theatre,
because he was writing plays that were intellectually stimulating,
but didn't kind of captivate the emotions.
I've been in the same room as him once,
and it was so exciting.
It was really genuinely exciting.
It was the day my first ever book had come out.
And my publisher took me to dinner after the launch party,
and it was so exciting.
And Tom Stop-hard was at a nearby table hanging out with other famous people.
I thought, "This is my life from now on. I haven't seen him since."
I just haven't seen him since.
Did you read out those lines from Revenge of the Sith?
His head snapped around, his eyes light up, yeah.
No, no, no.
The practice of someone taking a pass at a film script
is quite common in Hollywood, isn't it?
And I know there have been lots of comedy films in Hollywood
where they've actually been offered up
to like every British comedian I know has taken a crack
at a few modern film scripts.
Really?
I've done, I've had a cracker.
Oh, yeah. What are you doing?
I'll tell you afterwards.
Oh, come on.
I don't think I got any lines in.
But I know there was like, there was one that was made recently,
there was a Christmas film that I know at least 10 comedians
who had a crack at it.
Really?
So just adding extra lines to it?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, submitting them and they see if they like them more.
Yeah, yeah.
But I wanted to tell you about one not related to Stop-hard
that is close to my heart because my book is all about Charlotte Lucas
from Pride and Prejudice.
And Emma Thompson famously wrote the amazing screenplay
of sense and sensibility.
But she took a pass at the 2005 Pride and Prejudice.
And the line that became a meme that Charlotte Lucas says,
she says, I'm 27 years old.
I've no money and no prospects.
I'm already a burden to my parents.
And I'm frightened.
And Emma Thompson wrote those lines.
Joe Wright, the director said he went to Emma Thompson said,
can you help?
And she said, get a notebook out.
Write this down.
And she just improvised those lines.
Wow, wow.
Yeah, that apparently among Gen Zed and millennials has become a massive meme
for like very hard relate.
I'm 27 years old.
I've no money and no prospects.
I'm already a burden to my parents.
And I'm frightened.
That's so good.
Can I tell you one of the greatest script doctors of all time?
Yeah.
Because lots of people, Carrie Fisher was a great she worked on loads.
Roll Dal did a little bit on you only live twice, which I find interesting.
El Ron Hubbard of the Church of Scientology founder of.
Oh, that one.
Thanks for clarifying.
So there's this really bad film called Battlefield Earth.
Oh, yeah.
John Travolta.
Now, Hubbard had written a book called Battlefield Earth.
And it's about aliens.
It's a saga of the year 3000.
It's a thousand pages long.
It's lightweight for real SF fans.
But he really wanted it to be a movie.
Travolta loved it, was a Scientologist.
Now Travolta really wanted to make it.
And a writer called JD Shapiro got attached to the project.
And he wrote a script.
And he got a load of script notes.
And he said, these come right from the top.
I mean, they come from El Ron Hubbard.
The interesting thing about it is, Hubbard had died about ten years before.
So as far as I could tell, the only posthumous script doctor.
Very cool.
Do you know the script doctoring work of M. Knight Shyamalan?
So he wrote the sixth sense, that incredible movie.
And then that kind of plot twist reveal became kind of his signature move, right?
So Signs was another movie of his--
The Village.
The Village, exactly.
But he was also trying to make it as a writer.
And so had to do a lot of different projects.
At the same time, while he was doing the sixth sense.
So in the same year, he then had a movie come out in December.
His follow-up movie with his name on the credits.
And that movie was...
Stuart Little.
Can you believe that about the cartoon mouse?
Well, it's not cartoon.
Well, I guess it's a normal movie with animated mouse as the other lead character.
And all the humans are dead at the end.
Sorry?
And all the humans were dead all that time.
It was, yeah.
Well, he also, he did the script doctoring for She's All That.
I don't remember.
Do you remember Rachel Lee Cook?
She's an incredibly hideous woman because she wears glasses.
What if she--
If you spend half an hour with her, that wears off.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
The charm begins to come through.
But classic M Night Shyamalan plot twist, she takes the glasses off.
And suddenly, she's really beautiful.
And...
Have you ever tried that done?
You need to wear a red dress as well.
Yeah.
I think-- do we have to move on there?
We do have to move on there.
Just going back to Tom Stophard, very briefly.
He became massive when he wrote Rosencrantz and Gilden Stern at Dead.
It's basically two characters from Hamlet and it's their story.
And I didn't know this.
It premiered at the Edinburgh Fringe in 1966.
But it was absolutely massive there.
And then he went to London and it was absolutely massive there.
And then it went to New York.
And at the New York Premier, a journalist asked him, what is it about?
And he said, it's about to make me a lot of money.
[laughter]
And he was a journalist at the Bristol Evening Post when it debuted.
That's how he'd been making his living.
And again, this is an example of his amazing lines.
An editor tried to catch him out.
His news editor tried to catch him out because he said he was interested in current affairs.
And the editor said, all right, well, who's the current home secretary?
And Stophard said, I said I was interested in politics, not obsessed by them.
[laughter]
That's very good of us.
[music]
Let's move on to our final fact.
Okay, it is time for our final fact.
And that is my fact.
My fact this week is, old jobs in the UK that you used to be able to do,
included but-woman, baller, boner, and bottom-stainer.
Now, this is from the back end of a book that is called "Craftland" by James Fox,
who was actually here at the festival earlier today doing a talk.
He did a 12 p.m. today.
He's released this book where he's looking into craft jobs that are either endangered in the modern world
or people that are just carrying on with it and that we might not know about.
But it includes an index of all of these jobs that he says are on the brink of extinction or endangered.
I think in the case of the ones I just read, they must be basically-
Can you tell us what they do?
Like, what is a boner?
A boner.
Okay, so a boner used to be someone who would be the insertor of whale bones into a corset.
So when you were building a corset, yeah, that used to be used to help give it-
And, but-woman, that sounds like it's the female version of Butman.
Yeah, and-well, it's the seller of flatfish on a key side.
Yeah, but-well, okay.
What's a boner?
A boner is someone who would check, let's say if you were working in textiles,
you would check the balls of wool in advance of spinning.
So you would go around and go, "Yep, nice ball."
Dan, as you're explaining that, you're doing like really egregious hand gestures
that don't match up with what your words say.
It's just-for the room, yeah.
For all of us, yeah.
Could you give us some gestures for bottom stator?
That would be putting a stain on a bottom of a boot or a shoe.
I also had a bump.
So this isn't to do with craft exactly, but bummer-y.
Oh, what's bummer-y?
I think bummer-y.
So with a doubly at the end, which I just think sounds delightful.
Describe in 1875, this great burly fellows with bluff faces,
deep chests, and still deeper voices with a smack of the watermelon about them,
and a faculty for mental arithmetic, which is perfectly surprising,
there's the words of James Greenwood.
It was a middle man on a fish market.
Usually, I think the term was attached to Billingsgate fish market, particularly.
So it was like a commerce, but it was like a retail position, basically.
But in fish, specifically.
But they obviously had this reputation for being big, burly, bluff men.
Yeah, nice. Very cool.
I mean, it's such an interesting world, the world of craft land.
This book, by the way, I'll just give a shout out to Francesca at the Margate Bookshop
who told me about this amazing bookshop, if you haven't that bit of the country.
She showed it to me, and basically it covers 280 crafts that are still practice in Britain.
But what was noticed by James Fox is that half of them or more are endangered.
So we're sort of losing, we're getting down to the final person who is able to do certain things.
And there's an example that he gives of one person who is able to tune English church bells.
He's called Gidda Vad Hooker, and while he's doing it, he writes little things on each bell,
almost like little mottos on it to sort of give it something extra.
Yeah, so like he'll write on, for example, on one of the bells, or...
Don't. And he should write Tom.
Absolutely.
I've run out.
Bung and Bing. Oh, for God's idiot.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, God.
There's a list, isn't there, of heritage crafts that are endangered?
There's a list of ones that have gone completely now, and there's a list of ones that are endangered,
which means there's only one or maybe two people in the country who do it.
So in the UK, there are only one or two people who make arrows, bells, musical bows,
clogs, fans, gloves, pianos, ballet shoes, sauce, scissors, clay pipes, glass eyes, watches and horse whips.
So if we get cut off from the rest of the world, what's of those can we not do without?
Scissors.
Scissors is going to be tough. Ballet shoes, probably fine.
Yeah, horse whips will improvise, but scissors are fiddly.
Glass eyes?
Oh, you don't want access.
Yeah, you never know when you need one.
Well, it's scary, scary stuff.
I went today to see a guy called Andy Peters, who is the only person in the UK
who makes the wooden figure heads for boats.
Oh.
Which feels like something we could probably do without.
No, we can't.
Did you tell that to him to his face?
Well, my thought was like people were doing this in the olden days, right?
And it takes him like five months to make one of these things.
How do you make money like that?
Because it's not like everyone needs one.
Pirates will pay a fortune.
An arm and a leg.
Thank you.
I haven't seen the new aircraft carriers that we've got.
Have they got some of Andy Peters' work up front?
No, they haven't, but he does, he makes them for yachts, like super yachts sometimes.
I have genuinely seen some of his work within the last fortnight.
Really?
Well, you're super yachts.
That's right.
I don't want super yachts to have them.
Fair enough. This is a better one.
You know Cutty Sark?
Yeah.
Cutty Sark in Greenwich has a figurehead at the front, and I'm sure it's an Andy Peters thing.
I think I've read a thing.
Yeah, it is.
He did the...
Basically, there was a restoration that was done, and then they found some old pictures
and realized that what they'd restored looked off in light, what it originally looked like.
So they asked him to make a new one.
That's so cool.
And they have a massive collection of ships, figureheads, around the prow of the Cutty Sark.
Yeah. It's an awesome display.
Actually, now there are definitely more figureheads in museums than there are among ships.
Right.
I think that's it.
But it's interesting becoming the last person who makes something.
So James Fox is talking about a watchmaker who only produces five watches a year,
but he does them entirely on his own.
And the difference is watchmakers generally don't make an entire watch on their own.
Usually, if you were making a really well-crafted one,
would involve probably 20 different people doing different bits.
It's different disciplines coming together.
He trained himself as a kid to make watches entirely on his own.
He was a guest with this guy who was a master watchmaker.
And he brought him his first watch after a year and showed it to him.
And he said, "Rubbish, after spending a whole year on it."
So he went away for five years and made another watch, brought it back.
And he went, "Yes, you are a watchmaker."
So he now makes five a year.
And each one sells for roughly 300,000 per watch.
Does he write tick or talk on them as he finishes?
Because he should.
So the Heritage Crafts website is really interesting, well worth a look.
I've just joined, you can join and sign up to support some of the craft.
It's very cool.
So extinct ones are things like mouth-blown sheet glass making,
which survived until 1992, which I'm quite surprised by, to be honest.
But there is one of the very oldest, in fact, sorry,
the oldest thing anyone's done professionally is still going strong.
Because they list Heritage Crafts, some of which are currently viable.
Flint napping.
Oh, yeah.
I met a Flint napper like two weeks ago.
Did you?
Yeah.
I wish I hadn't said it because there's no anecdote that goes with it, but it's good.
What is it?
What's Flint napping?
It's like you get a piece of stone and you hit it with a harder piece of stone
and you get tiny bits of Flint and you can use them for cutting things and for shaving.
You can either do it to sort of repair a wall, which a Flint wall,
or in the old times people would be making arrowheads or sharp instruments or tools like that.
And this, I find this absolutely unbelievable.
There are still a few people doing it these days to make rep because they bring historic objects
and maybe ten more doing it to shape Flint for masonry.
So it is currently viable, although small.
But it is 3.3 million years old as a trade.
Wow.
It is more than ten times as old as our species.
It's 11 times as old as homo sapiens as a thing.
Is it still the same family running out?
It's the same family.
Close shop, mate.
Close shop.
They won't let you in.
We'll just find that bizarre.
Like the older shaped Flint tools.
But date back.
Yeah, that's very cool.
Well, interestingly, one of the old jobs that used to be able to be was a caveman.
And that was not a craft.
No, it was because you were responsible for the removal of clinkers and ashes
from the cave or tunnel beneath a furnace.
You were called a caveman as a result.
Here's another thing.
Two things that have a different meaning today.
A mugger.
Do you know what a mugger was?
It was a job that you could...
A mug maker?
Yeah.
For the first hundred years of that word, the word mugger meant someone who sold mugs.
Was there an amusing crossover period where someone said, "I'm a mugger."
I'm sorry, I've got plenty of mugs at home.
Thank you.
No, no, no, you misunderstand.
Give me your mugs.
Yeah.
And a badger.
Badger.
Badger was someone who...
It was a bit like Rachel's fish person.
It was someone who got some food from one place and then took it to someone to sell it from another place.
But they often got in trouble because they would hoard food, hoard grain and hoard bread.
It types of, yeah.
There was also, I read also about badgers, which was like...
There was young boys who played like a bugle or trumpet or something.
And that call was used to like call men to war.
Badgers.
Wow.
Sources needed for this.
But badgers was definitely...
Yeah, badgers was like sort of slang term for that job.
Nice.
And also a bodger as well as a badger.
No, it's just serious.
Really?
Yeah, bodger would have made chair legs.
That's very funny.
But badly.
Do any of us have a craft?
I can't think of that.
What do you mean you...
This is our craft.
Stage craft.
Yeah, but a real one.
You know, like a proper one.
Yeah.
No, I don't have a craft.
Now you make like chocolate sausages or something.
You've got like a weird...
What?
That's what he calls it when he's cut back for the bathroom.
It's like a chocolate sausage.
I don't want to talk about my time in the American prison system.
All right, Dan.
But...
God, this guy's flirting. It's really weird.
It's really weird.
Dan is referring to a private incident where I made a tasty...
What was it?
Like, what's it called?
That sausage that you...
What is it called?
A chocolate salami.
Has anyone ever made a chocolate salad?
It has, even worse.
It's a delicious pudding,
but it's also an amusing trick.
Because, you know, you bring out...
Oh, it's pudding time, everyone.
You bring out what looks like a salami.
It's covered in icing sugar.
You put netting around it.
You put string around it.
Yeah, like a proper salami.
It's a tad.
Well, okay, Dan.
Well, you're off the pudding list for life now.
Okay.
That is it, unfortunately.
That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast,
we can all be found online.
I'm on @Streiberland on Instagram, James.
My Instagram is on Instagram is on Instagram.
Andy.
And Rache.
And Rachel S.V. Paris.
Yeah, and just a reminder to everyone listening, Rachel's book is out now introducing Mrs. Collins.
It is just...
Give a quick blurb on it, Rache.
It follows Charlotte Lucas from Pride and Regulus after she marries Mr. Collins
and all that happens in the next few years.
Super cool, very exciting.
And yeah, if you want to get in contact with us as a group, podcast@QI.com, send us an email
and we'll put it onto a very exciting secret show called Jewel Drop us a Line,
which is part of our Club Fish World, which is our secret members club.
It's kind of like the Hellfire Club, but with less orgies.
For just $3.99 a month, we will release a baboon into your home.
Yeah, or, hey, just come back again next week, because we'll be back with another episode.
We'll see you then.
Goodbye!
Thank you.
[Applause]
[Music]
[BLANK_AUDIO]